Article

The Parameter-Optimized Recursive Sliding Variational Mode
Decomposition Algorithm and Its Application in Sensor
Signal Processing
Yunyi Liu 1,2 , Wenjun He 2 , Tao Pan 2 , Shuxian Qin 2 , Zhaokai Ruan 2 and Xiangcheng Li 1,2, *
1

2

*

Academic Editor: Baijie Qiao
Received: 14 January 2025
Revised: 27 February 2025
Accepted: 17 March 2025
Published: 20 March 2025
Citation: Liu, Y.; He, W.; Pan, T.; Qin,
S.; Ruan, Z.; Li, X. The ParameterOptimized Recursive Sliding
Variational Mode Decomposition
Algorithm and Its Application in

The Guangxi Key Laboratory of Multimedia Communications and Network Technology, Guangxi University,
Nanning 530004, China; liuyunyi@gxu.edu.cn
School of Computer and Electronic Information, Guangxi University, Nanning 530004, China;
2213391002@st.gxu.edu.cn (W.H.); 2313392017@st.gxu.edu.cn (T.P.); 2113391109@st.gxu.edu.cn (S.Q.);
ruanzhaokai@st.gxu.edu.cn (Z.R.)
Correspondence: xcli@gxu.edu.cn

Abstract: In industrial polishing, the sensor on the polishing motor needs to extract accurate signals in real time. Due to the insufficient real-time performance of Variational Mode
Decomposition (VMD) for signal extraction, some studies have proposed the Recursive
Sliding Variational Mode Decomposition (RSVMD) algorithm to address this limitation.
However, RSVMD can exhibit unstable performance in strong-interference scenarios. To
suppress this phenomenon, a Parameter-Optimized Recursive Sliding Variational Mode
Decomposition (PO-RSVMD) algorithm is proposed. The PO-RSVMD algorithm optimizes
RSVMD in the following two ways: First, an iterative termination condition based on
modal component error mutation judgment is introduced to prevent over-decomposition.
Second, a rate learning factor is introduced to automatically adjust the initial center frequency of the current window to reduce errors. Through simulation experiments with
signals with different signal-to-noise ratios (SNR), it is found that as the SNR increases
from 0 dB to 17 dB, the PO-RSVMD algorithm accelerates the iteration time by at least 53%
compared to VMD and RSVMD; the number of iterations decreases by at least 57%; and
the RMSE is reduced by 35% compared to the other two algorithms. Furthermore, when
applying the PO-RSVMD algorithm and the RSVMD algorithm to the Inertial Measurement
Unit (IMU) for measuring signal extraction performance under strong interference conditions after the polishing motor starts, the average iteration time and number of iterations
of PO-RSVMD are significantly lower than those of RSVMD, demonstrating its capability
for rapid signal extraction. Moreover, the average RMSE values of the two algorithms
are very close, verifying the high real-time performance and stability of PO-RSVMD in
practical applications.
Keywords: variational mode decomposition; recursive sliding; parameter optimization;
IMU signal; denoising

Sensor Signal Processing. Sensors 2025,
25, 1944. https://doi.org/10.3390/
s25061944
Copyright: © 2025 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license
(https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/).

Sensors 2025, 25, 1944

1. Introduction
Currently, wavelet transform and modal decomposition are the mainstream signal
denoising techniques. Wavelet transform is a signal processing technique based on wavelet
analysis. It performs multi-scale refinement analysis of the signal through scaling and
shifting operations, effectively handling the signal. Zhang et al. [1] proposed an improved
wavelet denoising algorithm, which uses the concept of adaptive weighted averaging
to determine the boundary between noise and signal components, and reconstructs the

https://doi.org/10.3390/s25061944

Sensors 2025, 25, 1944

2 of 20

filtered signal accordingly. However, the choice of wavelet basis heavily relies on human
experience, and improper selection can affect the decomposition performance of the signal.
Empirical Mode Decomposition (EMD) is one of the mainstream modal decomposition
algorithms. When applying EMD to remove signal noise, the signal is decomposed into
several intrinsic mode functions (IMF), and the selection criteria for noise IMF are crucial.
Many researchers have studied various correlation-based methods as noise determination
criteria. For example, in reference [2], the Bhattacharyya distance and the variance of the
autocorrelation function are used in a two-step process to filter out noise components. Shi
et al. [3] distinguish noise components from signal components based on the correlation
coefficient between each component and the original signal. Reference [4] uses the Hellinger
distance to filter out noise components, then extracts valid signal components using the
autocorrelation function, and finally reconstructs compensation errors by combining the
signal components with the residual. Wang et al. [5] remove high-frequency components,
then use the TFPF algorithm to extract useful signals from the intermediate-frequency
components, and finally merge the extracted signal with the low-frequency components
to reconstruct the original signal. These algorithms achieve signal denoising but carry
the risk of losing useful signals, leading to bias in the reconstructed signal. Meanwhile,
traditional EMD cannot decompose a signal if there are insufficient extreme points, which
can result in spectral overlap. To solve this issue, some studies have attempted to improve
the EMD algorithm. For example, an enhanced method effectively separates measurement
noise in drift signals using a combined EMD approach [6]. This improvement significantly
mitigates the mode mixing problem of EMD but does not fundamentally eliminate the
white noise introduced during the decomposition process.
Variational Mode Decomposition (VMD) [7], as an advanced signal processing technique, is particularly suitable for the analysis and processing of nonlinear and nonstationary signals. When using the VMD algorithm for denoising, the decomposition
parameters and noise separation criteria need to be pre-set. The precise separation of signal
and noise can only be effectively achieved when the decomposition level, penalty factor,
and other parameters are matched with the time-frequency characteristics of the signal
to be processed. To find the optimal decomposition level and penalty factor for a signal,
Wang et al. [8] used a differential evolution algorithm to search for the optimal combination of decomposition level and penalty factor in VMD. Other studies have introduced
population-based heuristic optimization algorithms into the VMD parameter pre-setting
stage, such as the Beetle Antennae Search Algorithm [9], but these methods have higher
computational complexity and certain randomness. To suppress truncation and endpoint
effects during signal decomposition, reference [10] used a relatively simple and direct
mathematical statistical method. It employed a triangular waveform matching approach to
search the entire signal and find the waveform most compatible with the endpoints, and
then used a grid search method based on mutual information entropy criteria to select the
optimal VMD parameters for the extended signal.
VMD has demonstrated superior decomposition performance in modal decomposition,
making it widely applicable in various fields. In the sensor domain, Inertial Measurement
Units (IMUs) are commonly used in applications such as autonomous driving [11], navigation [12], robotics [13], and industrial polishing [14]. IMUs are capable of capturing and
transmitting key kinematic information such as acceleration and angular velocity in real
time, which is crucial for achieving precise control. However, in practical applications,
IMU signals are often inevitably affected by noise, vibrations, and other interference factors.
These disturbances not only reduce the accuracy of the signals but also directly impact
subsequent data processing and analysis. In industrial polishing operations, it is necessary
to ensure the precision of both the polishing process and the real-time performance, which

Sensors 2025, 25, 1944

3 of 20

calls for improved IMU signal denoising capabilities. We applied VMD to denoise IMU
signals under industrial polishing conditions. However, the iterative optimization mechanism of VMD limits its decomposition efficiency to some extent, making it less effective in
handling large-scale signals or signals with high real-time requirements.
In reference [15], the authors proposed a novel method, the Recursive Sliding Variational Mode Decomposition (RSVMD) algorithm. This method replaces the original Fourier
transform of the model with sliding discrete Fourier transform. To enhance decomposition
efficiency while ensuring accuracy, the method incorporates prior knowledge from previous decompositions to set the initial decomposition parameters for the current window
and imposes stricter constraints on the iterative process. RSVMD significantly improves
decomposition efficiency while maintaining accuracy, making it more suitable for applications with high real-time requirements. However, through simulation experiments, we
found that when processing signals with strong interference components, RSVMD exhibits
unstable performance, which manifests as two main phenomena: First, there is a dramatic
increase in iteration time and iteration count; second, the center frequency is incorrectly
initialized after the window data are updated. These two phenomena lead to a decrease in
signal decomposition efficiency and insufficient output accuracy.
While the general signal decomposition capability of VMD-based methods is well established, the primary focus of this work is to address the real-time performance limitations
of RSVMD. Specifically, we aim to improve the computational efficiency of RSVMD in realworld applications, such as IMU signal processing in industrial polishing, where real-time
performance is critical. Although the decomposition accuracy of RSVMD is satisfactory,
its computational load and iteration time are often prohibitive in scenarios requiring high
real-time performance. Therefore, the RSVMD algorithm needs to undergo parameter
optimization, i.e., PO-RSVMD. To address the two unstable performance phenomena, an
iterative termination condition based on modal component error mutation judgment is
introduced to avoid over-decomposition, which can lead to a significant increase in computational load and a sharp decline in performance. At the same time, considering that
performance degradation may lead to errors in the center frequency band, a rate learning
factor is introduced to reduce the center frequency error. The algorithm combines the
current center frequency with the previous window’s center frequency to obtain the new
center frequency. Since the trend of iteration speed and algorithm performance is consistent,
the rate learning factor is automatically adjusted based on the change in iteration time
to maintain the initial center frequency. Then, through signal decomposition simulation
experiments, the performance of the VMD, RSVMD, and PO-RSVMD algorithms is compared. Additionally, we attempt to apply the PO-RSVMD algorithm to the denoising of
IMU angular velocity signals during polishing, with the expectation that PO-RSVMD can
quickly and accurately complete the decomposition of angular velocity signals and the
removal of interference components.

2. Algorithm Principles
2.1. Algorithm Fundamentals
Variational Mode Decomposition (VMD) is a completely non-recursive method of
signal decomposition that works by decomposing a signal into a series of intrinsic mode
functions (IMFs) with specific center frequencies and finite bandwidths. Given an input
signal f (t), the expression of the k-th IMFs obtained by VMD decomposition is shown in
Formula (1).
vk (t) = Ak (t) cos( φk (t))
(1)

Sensors 2025, 25, 1944

4 of 20

where Ak (t) represents the instantaneous amplitude of the corresponding mode component,
and φk (t) is the instantaneous phase. The instantaneous center frequency can be obtained
by differentiating the instantaneous phase.
The core idea of VMD algorithm is to reconstruct the constrained variational model
and obtain the optimal solution. The resulting construction of the constrained variational
mode is shown in Formulas (2) and (3).
K

min

{ v k },{ ω k }

∑ ∂t



k =1

j
δ(t) +
πt





∗ vk (t) e

2

− jωk t

!
(2)

2

s.t.∑kK=1 vk (t) = f (t)

(3)

where vk is the set of all modes, ωk is the set of center frequencies, and s.t. denotes
the constraint.
In order to render the constrained variational model no longer constrained, the
quadratic penalty term α and the Lagrange multiplier λ are utilized to address the reconstruction. Thus the obtained augmented Lagrange expression is shown in Formula (4).
h


i
j
δ(t) + πt ∗ vk (t) e− jωk t ||22
E
D
2
+ f (t) − ∑kK=1 vk (t) + λ(t), f (t) − ∑kK=1 vk (t)

L({vk }, {ωk }, λ) = α ∑kK=1 ∥∂t

(4)

2

We use the Alternate Direction Method of Multipliers (ADMM) [16,17] to obtain
the optimal solution of the variational mode iteratively, and the expression of the modal
components vnk +1 is shown in Formula (5).


K

vnk +1 = agr min α ∑ ∂t
vk ∈ X

k =1


δ(t) +

j
πt





∗ vk (t) e

− jωkn+1 t

2
2

+ f (t) − ∑ vin+1 (t) +
i ̸=k

λ(t)
2

2




(5)

2

where n is the number of iterations.
The principle of Sliding Discrete Fourier Transform (SDFT) [18,19] is to use the sliding
window to dynamically add new data and remove old data, and perform Discrete Fourier
Transform (DFT) to eliminate the redundant calculation. The expression of the singlesample sliding discrete Fourier transform is shown in Formula (6).
2πk

X1 (k) = [ X0 (k) − x (0) + x ( N )]e j N

(6)

When the single sample point is generalized to multiple sample points, that is, when
the step size is s, the corresponding expression of sliding window SDFT with multiple
sample points is shown in Formula (7).
2πks

L −1

Xs (k) = X0 (k )e j N + ∑ [ x ( p + N ) − x ( p)]WN

k ( p +1)

(7)

p =0

where Xs (k) is the spectrum of in the current window, x ( p + N ) is the new sampled data
added to the current window, and x ( p) is the old sampled data to be removed from the
k ( p +1)

current window; the complex exponential WN
is a rotational factor influenced by the
shifting parameter k.
We use SDFT to convert Formula (5) into the frequency domain, and the optimized
mode components are shown in Formula (8).
⌢
⌢ n +1
vi
(ω ) + ( λ (ω )/2)
1 + 2α(ω − ωk )2

SDFT (ω ) − ∑i̸=k
vnk +1 (ω ) =

(8)

Sensors 2025, 25, 1944

5 of 20

where SDFT (ω ) is the spectrum data obtained by SDFT calculation.
Similarly, the updated center frequency after iteration ωkn+1 is shown in Formula (9).
⌢

ωkn+1 ≈

∑ ω v k (ω )
⌢

∑ v k (ω )

2

2

(9)

2.2. Parameter-Optimized RSVMD Algorithm
The PO-RSVMD algorithm is designed to address the real-time performance limitations of RSVMD, particularly in scenarios with strong interference. While RSVMD
demonstrates satisfactory decomposition accuracy, its computational load and iteration
time can be prohibitive in real-time applications. The primary contribution of PO-RSVMD
lies in its ability to reduce computational complexity while maintaining comparable decomposition accuracy, rather than extending its applicability to a broader range of signal
types. Although the algorithm’s performance in handling arbitrary amplitude or frequency
modulation signals is an important direction for future research, the current study focuses
on optimizing RSVMD for real-time applications. The optimization strategy of RSVMD
will be described in detail below.
2.2.1. Supplementary Constraints for Convergence Conditions
The two iteration termination conditions of VMD mode are the maximum number of
iterations and the minimum convergence error, and the updating process for iteration is
terminated when one of the conditions above is met. In order to avoid over-decomposition
in the iterative update process, the relative error judgment is added into the original error
judgment condition. When the error is greater than the preset accuracy, the iteration
is terminated.
2
vnk +1 (ω ) − vnk (ω )
2
< εr
(10)
∑
2
n
vk (ω ) 2
k
2

∑ vnk +1 (ω ) − vnk (ω ) 2 < ε a

(11)

k

where ε r represents the relative error, and ε a represents the absolute error.
Although the algorithm obtains a relatively ideal result in the iteration process, it is
possible that the iteration process will continue until the maximum number of iterations
is reached, resulting in a certain error between the final result and the theoretical value.
Therefore, the iterative convergence condition requires further supplementary constraints
to prevent the RSVMD mode from falling into over-decomposition. Over-decomposition
is a situation where an excessive operation volume is generated due to deterioration
in the performance of the algorithm, which makes the signal decomposition accuracy
become lower. According to the literature on the original VMD algorithm, VMD uses the
ADMM solution. Due to the convergence of ADMM, the original residual r n will gradually
approach 0. The VMD solution is based on constraints such as Formula (3) above. The
original residual is represented by Formula (12).
K

r n = f (t) − ∑ vnk (t)

(12)

k =1

According to the ADMM update rules, the number of updates to Lagrangian multipliers is shown in Formula (13).

Sensors 2025, 25, 1944

6 of 20

K

λn+1 = λn + α f (t) − ∑ vnk +1 (t)

!
(13)

k =1

When performing the iterative solution, the dual residual of ADMM is represented
by Formula (14).
!
K

sn = λn+1 − λn = α f (t) − ∑ vnk +1 (t)

(14)

k =1

According to the constraints, the dual residual can be expressed by Formula (15).

K 
sn = α ∑ vnk +1 (t) − vnk (t)

(15)

k =1

According to the convergence of ADMM, the original residual r n will gradually
approach 0, so the dual residual sn will gradually approach 0. For the relative error ε r and
absolute error ε a in the iterative exit condition, since the objective function is monotonically
decreasing and has a lower bound, its residuals also converge to 0. This is proven as follows.
In each iteration, updating of the modal function vk (t) and the center frequency
ωk is achieved by minimizing the objective function. Because the objective function is
monotonically decreasing, the change in the modal function and the center frequency in
each iteration will gradually decrease; otherwise, the value of the objective function cannot
continue to decrease. Specifically, if the change in the modal function vk (t) is large, the
objective function will be significantly reduced. As the iteration progresses, the modal
function and the center frequency gradually approach the optimal value, the amount
of change will decrease, and the decrease in the objective function value will gradually
decrease. When the number of iterations n → ∞, the objective function converges to the
local minimum value, and the change in the modal function vk (t) and the center frequency
ωk is close to 0 vnk +1 (t) − vnk (t)

→ 0, ωkn+1 − ωkn → 0. Therefore, during the iteration
process, especially when the iteration error converges to a smaller value, the larger error
can clearly indicate that the system iteration is in an abnormal situation and the iteration
should stop. Therefore, based on the monotonic judgment of the above error changes, the
supplementary constraints are shown in Formulas (16) and (17).
2

kr =

εnr − εnr −1
= εnr − εnr −1 < 0
n − ( n − 1)

(16)

ka =

εna − εna −1
= εna − εna −1 < 0
n − ( n − 1)

(17)

where n is the number of current iterations, kr is the slope of the relative error, εnr and
εnr −1 are the relative errors of two adjacent iterations, k a is the slope of the absolute error,
and εna and εna −1 are the absolute errors of two adjacent iterations. When the above supplementary constraint conditions are not satisfied, the iterative optimization process is
terminated immediately.
2.2.2. Optimization of Center Frequency and Modal Components
In order to make the algorithm converge quickly, using the rate factor a to fuse the
initial parameters and result parameters in the previous window proportionally. This
can ensure the reasonable utilization of the data in the current window and improve the

Sensors 2025, 25, 1944

7 of 20

decomposition efficiency. From this, the current initial center frequency is constructed as
shown in Formula (18).
n o
n o
ωk0
= (1 − a) ωk0
+ a{ωke }last
(18)
current

last


where ωk0 current is the initial center frequency of the current window, ωk0 last is the
 e
initial center frequency of the previous sliding window, and ωk last is the final center
frequency. The value range of the rate factor a is 0 to 1.
Similarly, by introducing the rate factor a into the modal component, the initial value
expression of the mode component after optimization is obtained, as shown in Formula (19).


n o
v0k

current

n o
= (1 − a) v0k

last

+ a{vek }last

(19)



where v0k current is the initial modal component of the current window, v0k last is the
 e
initial modal component of the previous sliding window, and vk last is the final modal
component, and the value range of rate factor a is also 0 to 1.
When facing complex non-steady-state signals, the unified set learning rate cannot easily deal with various upheaval situations, so relatively stable and reliable initial parameters
cannot be obtained. The above findings show that when a large range of fluctuations occurs
in the iteration time, the decomposition effect, such as the difference between the starting
center frequency and the theoretical value at the next moment, or the similarity between
the original component and the extracted modal component, will also change drastically,
and these multiply. The change pattern of indicators is almost consistent, indicating that
there is a real-time response relationship between iteration time and decomposition effect.
Therefore, this article attempts to automatically control parameter initialization based on
the fluctuations in iteration time.
The relationship between the change in time amplitude and the initial center frequency
was assessed, and it was found that with a sharp increase in the iteration time, the gap between
the subsequent adjacent initial center frequency and the theoretical value also increased, indicating that the center frequency of the previous window is less suitable for the current window
data. In addition, the inadequacy generated increases the difficulty of the decomposition of
VMD, and it takes a long time to obtain the optimal solution. At this time, if the rate factor
is reduced based on the previous section algorithm, that is, when the parameters of the next
window are initialized, the proportion of the center frequency of the error result is reduced,
and the proportion of the initial center frequency closer to the ideal value is increased accordingly, ensuring current window rationalization of the initial parameters to avoid subsequent
inefficiency of decomposition caused by improper initial values.
To summarize, this section proposes establishing a mapping relationship between
the time fluctuation amplitude and rate factor, controlling the proportion of existing data
participating in initialization, and conducting adaptive learning and updating of the center
frequency and modal components. Through multiple experiments, we explored the relationship between the magnitude of time change, initial parameters, and rate factors, and
found that there is an interval correspondence between the first two, so we constructed the
correspondence relationship as in Formula (20).


0, ∆t ≥ 0.8




0.001, 0.6 ≤ ∆t < 0.8



 0.01, 0.4 ≤ ∆t < 0.6
a=
(20)

0.05, 0.2 ≤ ∆t < 0.4




0.2, 0.1 ≤ ∆t < 0.2



 0.5, others

Sensors 2025, 25, 1944

8 of 20

In the formula, ∆t is the error value of the first two iteration times, and a is the rate
factor. When the time error does not belong to the defined abnormal fluctuation range, the
default value is 0.5. The algorithm first estimates the time change in real time, converts the
front and back changes in the running time to the weight coefficient, and then substitutes
Equations (14) and (15) to set the initial center frequency and modal components of VMD.
2.2.3. Algorithm Implementation Workflow
The algorithm constructs a real-time VMD model guided by a sliding window. Firstly,
it utilizes SDFT to compute the spectrum, thereby reducing the time required for frequency
domain transformation. Secondly, during parameter initialization, the results from previous
stages are used as the initial parameters for the current stage to reduce computational costs.
Finally, a minimum absolute error criterion is added to further constrain the convergence
rule, preventing potential over-decomposition phenomena during iterations.
PO-RSVMD, derived from VMD, still requires reasonable presetting of input parameters in the initial stage to ensure the accuracy of the decomposition results. Before
processing the signal, the window length is selected based on the sampling characteristics
of the equipment and the frequency resolution, and the sliding step size is set according
to actual requirements, thereby completing the sliding window design of the algorithm.
Additionally, appropriate values for the number of decomposition layers K, the penalty
coefficient α, the maximum number of iterations Nmax , the relative error ε r , and the absolute
error ε a are set. It is particularly noted that for the first window of data, the initial modes
are set to 0, and Fourier transform is performed to obtain the spectrum Fcurrent . The first
K peak frequencies in the spectrum are used as the initial center frequencies. After VMD
processing, the specified mode components {uk }current and center frequencies {ωk }current
are obtained and used as initial parameters for subsequent data, enabling recursive sliding
Variational Mode Decomposition.
The flowchart of PO-RSVMD is shown in Figure 1, and the specific implementation
steps are as follows.
(1)
(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Read the current time data input value based on the pre-designed sliding window.
Initialize the parameters by setting the Lagrange multiplier λ̂ and the number of
iterations n to 0. Use the decomposition results from the previous window signal to
initialize the input parameters for the current window. Assign the center frequency
{ωk }current and intrinsic modal component {uk }current from the previous window’s
output to the initial center frequency {ωk }init and initial modal component {uk }init of
the current window.
Perform sliding discrete Fourier transform, and calculate the spectrum information of
the current window using the spectrum of the previous frame data and the new and
old data before and after the update, that is, Formula (7).
Iterate to calculate the optimal solution; enter the internal iterative operation of VMD;
solve the optimal variational decomposition of the current time data using the ADMM
method; substitute the updated frequency spectrum, modal components, and central
frequency under the corresponding iteration times into Formulas (8) and (9) to update
the modal components and central frequency; and calculate the relative error and
absolute error of this iteration according to Formulas (10) and (11).
Set n = n + 1. If n is less than the maximum number of iterations Nmax at this time, or
both the absolute and relative errors are less than the preset accuracy, then the iteration
will be stopped; otherwise, repeat step (4) until the iteration stop conditions are met.
Please refer to Formulas (12) and (13) for the iteration stop conditions. Perform inverse
Fourier transform and output the result of this window.

Sensors 2025, 25, 1944

9 of 20

(6)

Slide the window with the specified step size to update the time series, and repeat
steps (1) to (5) to perform Variational Mode Decomposition on the signal until all data
have been processed.

Figure 1. PO-RSVMD algorithm flow chart.

3. Experimental Analysis and Results
The simulation experiments conducted in this study were designed to evaluate the
real-time performance of PO-RSVMD in comparison to VMD and RSVMD, particularly
in scenarios with strong interference. While additional simulation cases could further
demonstrate the general signal decomposition capabilities of VMD-based methods, they
are not directly relevant to the core objective of this study, which is to improve the computational efficiency of RSVMD for real-time applications. We implemented the PO-RSVMD
algorithm using MATLAB 2021b and conducted a series of simulation experiments to
evaluate its performance in comparison to VMD and RSVMD. The experiments focused
on signal decomposition under varying levels of noise and interference, with a particular
emphasis on real-time performance and accuracy.
3.1. Evaluation Metrics
The root-mean-square error (RMSE) was used to evaluate the performance metrics of
the algorithm. The RMSE formula is given by Formula (21).
v
u
u1 N
⌢
RMSE = t ∑ | x (n)− x (n)|2
N n =1
⌢

(21)

where x (n) is the true component of the signal, x (n) is the component obtained after signal
decomposition, and N is the length of the signal. The closer the decomposed signal is to the
true component, the smaller the RMSE value, indicating better decomposition performance.

Sensors 2025, 25, 1944

10 of 20

3.2. Analysis of Unstable Performance Phenomenon of RSVMD and Optimization Results
The simulation signal used in our study was sourced from reference [20], which is
widely applied in various EMD and VMD simulation experiments, and in simulation
experiments using their respective improved algorithms, and holds significant application
and reference value, as shown in Equation (22).

x = x1 + x2 + x3 + η



 x = cos(2π × 2t)
1

x2 = 14 cos(2π × 24t)



1
cos(2π × 288t)
x3 = 16

(22)

where x is the original signal, x1 , x2 , and x3 are cosine signals with frequencies of 2 Hz,
24 Hz, and 288 Hz, respectively, and η is Gaussian white noise.
The sampling frequency of the constructed simulation signal is set to 1000 Hz, i.e.,
f s = 1000 Hz, with a sampling duration of 10 s (T = 10 s) and an SNR of 20 dB. We plotted
only the first cycle of the simulation signal, as well as the time-domain waveforms of its
components, as shown in Figure 2. This simulation signal is composed of three harmonic
signals with specific frequencies, so the number of decomposition modes for RSVMD
was set to 3. The initial center frequencies were set to the frequencies of the sub-signals,
the initial mode of the first window was set to 0, the penalty factor was set to 2000, the
maximum number of iterations was 500, the relative error was set to 5 × 10−3 , and the
iteration error was set to 5 × 10−6 .

(a)

(b)

Figure 2. Time-domain plot of original signal and its sub-signals. (a) Simulation signal. (b) Sub-signal.

Using [16, 1000] as the sliding step size and window length, RSVMD decomposition
experiments were conducted on the noisy simulation signal described in Equation (22).
After multiple experiments, it was found that in some cases, the decomposition results
exhibited unstable behavior. The original signals that caused the unstable behavior were
highly similar in waveform to the original signals that exhibited stable behavior, as shown in
Figure 3. The difference between unstable and stable behavior phenomena in this article is
that for the same signal, after adding random noise with the same signal-to-noise ratio, the
overall trends and amplitudes of the resulting two signals are very similar. However, when
decomposing these two highly similar signals using RSVMD with the same parameters,
the decomposition results show significant differences. These differences are reflected
in aspects such as the number of iterations, iteration time, center frequencies, and the
discrepancies between the decomposed modes and the true signal.

Sensors 2025, 25, 1944

11 of 20

Figure 3. The original signals in the two phenomena.

However, under the RSVMD unstable behavior phenomenon, the error between the
decomposed component IMF1 and the true component increases significantly at certain
stages. We used RMSE to compare the difference in signal components between the stable
and unstable behavior phenomena, as shown in Figure 4.

Figure 4. The RMSE of the sub-signals in the two phenomena.

3.2.1. Issue of Over-Decomposition
The over-decomposition phenomenon is characterized by a significant increase in the
number of iterations and iteration time, as shown in Figure 5.
After further adding constraints to the iteration convergence conditions for algorithm
optimization, a segment of data exhibiting the unstable behavior phenomenon was used to
test the effectiveness of the algorithm, as shown in Figure 6.
From Figure 6a, it can be observed that the optimized RSVMD algorithm terminates
after 217 iterations. Both algorithms use the default iteration count of 500 and the default
preset error parameters. From the figure, it can be observed that RSVMD exhibits overdecomposition, after which the absolute error begins to increase, and the iteration cannot
be stopped. This indicates that PO-RSVMD effectively addresses the over-decomposition
issue in RSVMD. To better evaluate the performance of the algorithm, we represent the
modal components with IMF1, IMF2, and IMF3, corresponding to center frequencies of
288 Hz, 24 Hz, and 2 Hz, respectively, based on frequency order. The RMSE values for the
two algorithms were calculated through the aforementioned optimization experiments to
assess their effectiveness, as shown in Table 1. From Table 1, it can be concluded that the
RMSE of each modal component in the PO-RSVMD algorithm is lower than that of the
RSVMD algorithm, indicating that the algorithm’s performance has been improved.

Sensors 2025, 25, 1944

12 of 20

(a)

(b)

Figure 5. The algorithm decomposition efficiency results for the two phenomena. (a) The iteration
time in the two phenomena. (b) The number of iterations in the two phenomena.

(a)

(b)

Figure 6. Error variation in iterative process of RSVMD and PO-RSVMD. (a) Variation in absolute
error. (b) Variation in relative error.
Table 1. RMSE of sub-signals for the two algorithms.

Algorithm

IMF1

IMF2

IMF3

RSVMD
PO-RSVMD

0.867
0.0391

0.0387
0.0362

0.0281
0.0273

3.2.2. Issue of Increased Central Frequency Error
After the performance degradation of RSVMD, an increase in the center frequency
error of each component occurs, as shown in Figure 7.
Through our research, it was found that introducing a rate learning factor can effectively reduce the error caused by the incorrect initialization of the center frequency.
Introducing a fixed rate learning factor reduces the error to some extent, but when the
center frequency error fluctuates significantly, the error remains unacceptable. Therefore,
by automatically adjusting the rate learning factor based on the changes in iteration time,
we can significantly suppress the increase in center frequency error. The experimental
results are shown in Figure 8.

Sensors 2025, 25, 1944

13 of 20

Figure 7. The difference between the initial center frequency and theoretical value in the two
phenomena.

Figure 8. The difference between the center frequency and theoretical value in the different algorithms.

From Figure 8, it is evident that there is a significant discrepancy between the initial
center frequency and the theoretical value in RSVMD and RSVMD with fixed rate factor initialization parameters. IMF1 exhibits several drastic fluctuations ranging from 17% to 52%,
and these fluctuations persist for a relatively long duration, while the fluctuation ranges for
IMF2 and IMF3 are about 5% to 10%. Although RSVMD with fixed rate factor initialization
parameters mitigates the impact of errors to some extent, its effectiveness is limited. In
contrast, the difference in our improved algorithm shows almost no significant fluctuations
throughout the process, and at mutation points, it successfully maintains the initial center
frequency near the actual value. This improvement is attributed to PO-RSVMD, which
automatically adjusts the initial parameters of the previous window based on the detected
changes in iteration time. This reduces the impact on the current window, effectively halts
the center frequency error fluctuations, and substantially decreases the error, ensuring the
accuracy of subsequent iterative operations.
3.3. PO-RSVMD Algorithm Performance
To make the experimental data more rigorous, we set the SNR in the range of [0, 40]
with a 3 dB interval, in order to verify the real-time denoising capability of the RSVMD
optimization algorithm. The experimental results are shown in Figure 9.

Sensors 2025, 25, 1944

14 of 20

(a)

(b)

Figure 9. Average iteration time and average iteration count of each algorithm at different SNRs.
(a) Average iteration time. (b) Average iteration count.

It is clearly seen from Figure 9a,b that the PO-RSVMD algorithm is highly efficient
in terms of signal decomposition. In the [0, 17] dB SNR range, the average iteration time
and iteration count for the VMD and RSVMD algorithms tend to stabilize at a fixed value,
while the average iteration time and iteration count for PO-RSVMD show an increasing
trend, but its averages are much smaller than those of the other two algorithms. In terms of
time, PO-RSVMD is 76–97% faster than VMD and 53–95% faster than RSVMD. In terms
of iteration count, PO-RSVMD reduces the number of iterations by 57–95% compared to
the other two algorithms. In the [17, 40] dB SNR range, the iteration time and counts for
all three algorithms show a decreasing trend, but PO-RSVMD remains the most efficient.
This indicates that PO-RSVMD achieves higher decomposition efficiency than VMD and
RSVMD under different SNR conditions, confirming that the algorithm can still perform
real-time decomposition of useful signals even under strong interference.
Starting from the decomposition accuracy, the average RMSE of each component
derived from the three algorithms under the [0, 40] dB SNR was used, as shown in Figure 10.

Figure 10. Average RMSE of three algorithms at different SNRs.

As shown in Figure 10, the PO-RSVMD algorithm achieves the highest similarity
between each modal component and the original component. Furthermore, in the [0, 15]
dB signal-to-noise ratio range, the decomposition accuracy of this algorithm is still 35%
higher than that of the other two algorithms, indicating that the PO-RSVMD algorithm has
stronger denoising capabilities.

Sensors 2025, 25, 1944

15 of 20

In conclusion, the PO-RSVMD algorithm can decompose signals more quickly, and
its decomposition accuracy is higher than that of VMD and RSVMD, even in low signalto-noise ratio environments. The current simulation results clearly demonstrate that PORSVMD significantly reduces iteration time and computational load while maintaining
comparable decomposition accuracy, thereby validating its suitability for real-time signal
processing in industrial polishing.

4. IMU Angular Velocity Denoising Experiment in Polishing Conditions
Although PO-RSVMD is an improved algorithm designed for the real-time application
of VMD, its underlying principle remains fundamentally consistent with VMD in terms of
denoising. As explained in Section 1, any signal can be regarded as a composite signal composed of several sub-signals with specific frequencies. Typically, useful signals are primarily
concentrated in the low-frequency components, while interference signals are more prevalent in the high-frequency components. Based on this, the conventional VMD denoising
strategy involves removing disturbance components according to relevant signal indicators
and then superimposing the retained signal components to reconstruct a more accurate
signal. Following this approach, we similarly consider the low-frequency components
obtained after removing the high-frequency components as the denoised signal.
VMD denoising involves two key stages, signal decomposition and component reconstruction, with the effectiveness of denoising closely related to the decomposition
parameters and the reconstruction parameters. In the decomposition stage, the main
parameters include the number of decomposition modes and the penalty factor. In the
reconstruction stage, the parameters refer to the number of modal components retained.
During the decomposition stage, if the number of decomposition modes is too high or
the penalty factor is too large, over-decomposition can occur, leading to the emergence of
spurious components. Conversely, if the number of decomposition modes is too low or the
penalty factor is too small, modal mixing will occur, causing a decrease in decomposition
accuracy. In the reconstruction stage, the reconstruction coefficient, i.e., the number of
modal components retained, plays a critical role. Retaining too many modal components
makes it difficult to effectively filter out interference components, while retaining too few
may result in the removal of useful signals along with noise. Therefore, the choice of
these two types of parameters will significantly affect subsequent quantitative analysis and
modeling work.
In industrial polishing operations, the polishing head is subjected to severe interference
from strong vibrations, impacts, and high-speed rotations, which causes the IMU sensor’s
output signal to be mixed with a large number of interference components, rendering the
IMU unable to function properly. In terms of application analysis, the data were collected
from an IMU chip mounted on an industrial robotic arm. The industrial robot was a KUKA
robot, equipped with an IMU with chip model BNO005, which is an industrial-grade
IMU capable of outputting three-axis acceleration and angular velocity information. The
signal sampling frequency was 50 Hz. Figure 11a shows a schematic diagram of the on-site
polishing robotic arm, and Figure 11b provides the model and dimensions of the IMU chip.
Before the polishing motor starts, the IMU’s angular velocity is relatively smooth and
stable. However, after the motor starts, mechanical vibrations cause the IMU’s angular
velocity to be contaminated with significant disturbance signals. As shown in Figure 12.
Figure 12 illustrates the variation in the robotic arm’s Y-axis angular velocity before
and after the operation of the polishing motor. Since the robotic arm still exhibits slight
vibrations even when the motor is not operating, causing minor oscillations in the IMU’s
angular velocity output, the average angular velocity from multiple experiments before
motor operation is taken as the ground truth for comparison. From the figure, it is evident

Sensors 2025, 25, 1944

16 of 20

that motor operation significantly interferes with the IMU’s angular velocity output. To
more clearly identify the main frequency components of the vibration interference, the
Welch power spectral density estimation method was applied to perform a spectral analysis
of the raw data in Figure 12. The results are shown in Figure 13.

(a)

(b)

Figure 11. A field operation diagram of the industrial robot and the model of the IMU used.
(a) Industrial robot. (b) BNO005.

Figure 12. Y-axis angular velocity before and after motor operation.

Figure 13. Frequency component analysis of raw data.

The results of decomposing the angular velocity sampling data using the PO-RSVMD
method are presented. The figure displays the frequency spectra of each IMF (Intrinsic

Sensors 2025, 25, 1944

17 of 20

Mode Function) component and compares them with the spectral components in Figure 13.
The results demonstrate that PO-RSVMD can effectively separate the vibration interference,
validating the effectiveness of PO-RSVMD in this application, as shown in Figure 14.

Figure 14. PO-RSVMD decomposition angular velocity sampling data.

In order to verify the high real-time performance and stability of PO-RSVMD in this
polishing project scenario, comparisons of the center frequency variation and iteration
times between RSVMD and PO-RSVMD and the RMSE results were carried out. We
compared PO-RSVMD with RSVMD based on this experiment and found that PO-RSVMD
significantly reduces the number of iterations, shortens the runtime, and still maintains a
high level of decomposition accuracy. The relevant experimental parameters were set as
follows: the RSVMD window length was 40 s, and the window step size was 0.1 s. The
update rate in Formula (18) was set to 0.1/40 = 0.0025. The ωy data from the motor startup
experiment were selected for analysis.
There is a significant difference in the variation in center frequencies between RSVMD
and PO-RSVMD, as shown in Figure 15. During the real-time window iteration process,
even though only a small amount of data was updated each time (e.g., with a window step
size of 0.1 s), the center frequency of RSVMD exhibits substantial fluctuations. These large
fluctuations may lead to instability in the decomposition results, particularly when dealing
with high-frequency vibration interference, where the drastic changes in center frequency
can affect the accuracy and reliability of the algorithm. The proposed PO-RSVMD in this
paper effectively mitigates the severe fluctuations in center frequency by introducing a
learning and updating mechanism for the initial frequency. PO-RSVMD can more stably
adjust the center frequency during each window update, thereby reducing frequency
oscillations and enhancing the robustness of the algorithm.

Figure 15. Comparison of center frequency variation between RSVMD and PO-RSVMD.

Sensors 2025, 25, 1944

18 of 20

As shown in Figure 16, it can be observed that the number of iterations for RSVMD
increases dramatically during the time period from 73 to 133 s, while the number of
iterations for PO-RSVMD is significantly reduced, and its RMSE is very close to that of
RSVMD. This high number of iterations not only increases the computational complexity
of the algorithm, but also leads to a longer runtime. Especially when dealing with highfrequency vibration interference, an increase in the number of iterations significantly affects
the real-time performance of the algorithm. PO-RSVMD still maintains a low RMSE value
while reducing the number of iterations. This improvement allows PO-RSVMD to have
higher real-time performance without performance degradation in practical applications.

Figure 16. RSVMD and PO-RSVMD iterations and RMSE comparison graph.

In order to evaluate the performance differences between the PO-RSVMD and RSVMD
algorithms, this paper compares the average number of iterations, average iteration time, and
average RMSE values of the two algorithms. See Table 2 for the specific comparison results.
Table 2. Iteration count, iteration time, and RMSE value of RSVMD and PO-RSVMD.

Algorithm

Average Iteration Count

Average Iteration Time (s)

Average RMSE

PO-RSVMD

22
23
20
35
25

0.029
0.031
0.028
0.049
0.035

0.022
0.022
0.018
0.031
0.021

RSVMD

1262
1252
1216
919
1230

1.710
1.700
1.640
1.259
1.671

0.014
0.014
0.014
0.024
0.013

It can be found in Table 2 that the average number of iterations and time of PORSVMD in this experiment are significantly lower than those of RSVMD, which shows that
it can quickly process IMU signals in the motor polishing scenario, and the average RMSE
difference between the two algorithms is very small, which verifies that The PO-RSVMD
algorithm has high accuracy and good robustness in real-time applications.

5. Conclusions
This paper proposes the PO-RSVMD algorithm to address the real-time performance
limitations of RSVMD in industrial polishing applications. During the exploration of

Sensors 2025, 25, 1944

19 of 20

RSVMD applications, we identified two performance degradation phenomena in practical
use: over-decomposition and increased center frequency error. To address these issues,
the former was optimized by introducing iterative termination conditions to detect and
handle component error mutations, while the latter was mitigated by further incorporating
an adaptive rate learning factor to adjust the initialization of center frequency parameters. Simulation experiments verified that PO-RSVMD outperforms VMD and RSVMD
with faster iteration times, fewer iterations, and significantly lower RMSE values for the
decomposed modal components, indicating higher decomposition efficiency. Finally, we
applied PO-RSVMD and RSVMD to denoising experiments performed by IMU signals
under strong interference conditions. The results show that PO-RSVMD requires much less
iteration time than RSVMD, and both can effectively decompose signals while ensuring
their accuracy. The primary contribution of this work lies in the significant reduction in
computational complexity and iteration time while maintaining comparable decomposition accuracy. Although the algorithm’s performance in handling arbitrary amplitude or
frequency modulation signals is an important direction for future research, the current
study focuses on optimizing RSVMD for real-time applications, particularly in the context of IMU signal processing. Future work will explore the applicability of PO-RSVMD
to a broader range of signal types and further enhance its robustness in complex signal
decomposition scenarios.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, Y.L. and X.L.; methodology, Y.L. and W.H.; software, W.H.
and T.P.; analysis X.L. and Y.L.; writing original draft preparation, W.H., S.Q. and T.P.; writing review
and editing, Z.R., W.H. and T.P. supervision, Y.L. and X.L.; funding acquisition, Y.L. and X.L. All
authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This work was supported by the Nation Natural Science Foundation of China under
Grant No. 62361003, in part by the KR&DP of Guangxi under Grant Nos. GuiKeAB25069281,
GuiKeAD25069071 and GuiKeAB23075155.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Informed consent was obtained from all subjects involved in this study.
Data Availability Statement: Publicly available datasets were analyzed in this study.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The funders had no role in the design
of the study.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Zhang, H.; Xiong, H.; Hao, S.; Yang, G.; Wang, M.; Chen, Q. A Novel Multidimensional Hybrid Position Compensation Method
for INS/GPS Integrated Navigation Systems During GPS Outages. IEEE Sens. J. 2024, 24, 962–974. [CrossRef]
Liu, Y.; Chen, G.; Wei, Z.; Yang, J.; Xing, D. Denoising Method of MEMS Gyroscope Based on Interval Empirical Mode
Decomposition. Math. Probl. Eng. 2020, 1, 3019152. [CrossRef]
Shi, B.; Su, Y.; Zhang, D.; Wang, C.; AbouOmar, M.S. Research on Trajectory Reconstruction Method Using Automatic Identification
System Data for Unmanned Surface Vessel. IEEE Access 2019, 7, 170374–170384. [CrossRef]
Zeng, X.; Xian, S.; Liu, K.; Yu, Z.; Wu, Z. A method for compensating random errors in MEMS gyroscopes based on interval
empirical mode decomposition and ARMA. Meas. Sci. Technol. 2023, 35, 015020. [CrossRef]
Wang, C.; Cui, Y.; Liu, Y.; Li, K.; Shen, C. High-G MEMS Accelerometer Calibration Denoising Method Based on EMD and
Time-Frequency Peak Filtering. Micromachines 2023, 14, 970. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Shi, Y.; Fang, L.; Xue, Z.; Qi, Z. Research on Random Drift Model Identification and Error Compensation Method of MEMS Sensor
Based on EEMD-GRNN. Sensors 2022, 22, 5225. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Dragomiretskiy, K.; Zosso, D. Variational Mode Decomposition. IEEE Trans. Signal Process. 2014, 62, 531–544. [CrossRef]
Wang, Y. An Adaptive Variational Mode Decomposition Technique with Differential Evolution Algorithm and Its Application
Analysis. Shock Vib. 2021, 1, 2030128. [CrossRef]

Sensors 2025, 25, 1944

9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.

15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.

20 of 20

Wang, P.; Li, G.; Gao, Y. A compensation method for gyroscope random drift based on unscented Kalman filter and support
vector regression optimized by adaptive beetle antennae search algorithm. Appl. Intell. 2023, 53, 4350–4365. [CrossRef]
Ding, M.; Shi, Z.; Du, B.; Wang, H.; Han, L. A signal de-noising method for a MEMS gyroscope based on improved VMD-WTD.
Meas. Sci. Technol. 2021, 32, 095112. [CrossRef]
Huang, H.; Zhang, X.; Yang, J.; Fu, Y.; Bian, J. Research on sensor fusion-based calibration and real-time point cloud mapping
methods for laser lidar and IMU. Int. Arch. Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci. 2023, XLVIII-1/W2-2023, 1199–1206.
Zhang, T.; Yuan, M.; Wang, L.; Tang, H.; Niu, X. A Robust and Efficient IMU Array/GNSS Data Fusion Algorithm. IEEE Sens. J.
2024, 24, 26278–26289. [CrossRef]
Kim, H.; Choi, Y. Comparison of Three Location Estimation Methods of an Autonomous Driving Robot for Underground Mines.
Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 4831. [CrossRef]
Pinto, V.H.; Amorim, A.; Rocha, L.; Moreira, A.P. Enhanced Performance Real-Time Industrial Robot Programming by Demonstration using Stereoscopic Vision and an IMU sensor. In Proceedings of the 2020 IEEE International Conference on Autonomous
Robot Systems and Competitions (ICARSC), Ponta Delgada, Portugal, 15–17 April 2020; pp. 108–113.
Dan, D.; Zeng, G.; Pan, R.; Yin, P. Block-wise recursive sliding variational mode decomposition method and its application on
online separating of bridge vehicle-induced strain monitoring signals. Mech. Syst. Signal Process. 2023, 198, 110389. [CrossRef]
Boyd, S.; Parikh, N.; Chu, E.; Peleato, B.; Eckstein, J. Distributed Optimization and Statistical Learning via the Alternating Direction
Method of Multipliers; Now Foundations and Trends: Hanover, MA, USA, 2011.
Jiao, Y.; Jin, Q.; Lu, X.; Wang, W. Alternating direction method of multipliers for linear inverse problems. SIAM J. Numer. Anal.
2016, 54, 2114–2137. [CrossRef]
Rafii, Z. Sliding Discrete Fourier Transform with Kernel Windowing [Lecture Notes]. IEEE Signal Process. Mag. 2018, 35, 88–92.
[CrossRef]
van der Byl, A.; Inggs, M.R. Constraining error—A sliding discrete Fourier transform investigation. Digit. Signal Process. 2016,
51, 54–61. [CrossRef]
Zheng, T.; Xu, A.; Xu, X.; Liu, M. Modeling and Compensation of Inertial Sensor Errors in Measurement Systems. Electronics 2023,
12, 2458. [CrossRef]

Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

